How was our group work organized?

Organizing group work was a little unusual during the Covid-19 pandemic since our group members were not allowed to see each other in person which is usually done at least once when working in groups. However we managed to organize our group tasks using chat applications fairly well.
Originally, the first exercises we had to hand in were Exercise 2a and 2b (before their deadline was merged with the deadline of Exercises 2c and 2d). We discussed if half of the group should work on 2a while the other half works on 2b, but we gave up on that idea. We decided that as a team we should be collectively responsible for our group exercises and didn’t need to assign different responsibilities to each group member. We believed that each group member could contribute to the exercises by looking at what needs to be done and then work on one of the missing tasks. We maintained this “laissez-faire-philosophy” for the whole semester, i.e. we also didn’t assign personal responsibilities to our team members for exercises 2c, 2d, 3 and 5.
After each exercise we shortly discussed what we should do better for the next exercise (especially if we have to start working earlier on the next exercise). Furthermore, we had to handle that some of our team members were being prevented of contributing to the exercises due to different circumstances. One member was summoned to civil service during the semester and was therefore unable to contribute to exercise 3. Another team member had trouble following the course due to his background being in Management and not Computer Science and therefore could not contribute to the coding exercises. Those circumstances caused the remaining members of the team to get under some pressure, especially during exercise 3.
The less technical part of the documentation was written by the member that had trouble following the course, while the technical part was written by several different group members.



What worked? What did not work?

As already mentioned, our philosophy consisted in not assigning personal responsibilities to different team members. This strategy somehow always worked out in the end in the sense that we were able to hand in solutions and pass all group exercises. But at the beginning we had some problems with our time management. We got into serious time pressure when we had to hand in Exercises 2a-d, meaning that several team members worked several hours before the deadline in order to finish in time. This also meant that we were only able to hand in minimal solutions since we had to set priorities and could not develop more elaborate solutions. Our time management then got better after each exercise because (among other reasons) we appealed to each other that we don’t want to do the same error and do the work for the following exercise a few days/hours before the deadline. For Exercise 3 we still worked on the day we had to hand in our solutions, but it was less stressful. For Exercise 5 we even managed to more or less finish the exercise two days before the deadline. The last exercise was significantly shorter than the previous ones, which was probably also a reason for being finished so much earlier than the previous exercises.
The inherent problem of a “laissez-faire” organization strategy is that in larger groups, members might assume that someone else would do the work. But if everyone assumes that, nobody will end up doing the work. Generally speaking, the success of our way to organize group work depends highly on the different personalities of the group members. We noticed that some group members started relatively early to work on the exercises, while some waited longer and started working a few days before the exercises. Our organization strategy would obviously work very well if all team members started working early on the exercises and very badly if all group members work best when they are under time pressure. But in the end we always managed to get the work done.
